# Uncertainty propagation

PyCO2SYS provides tools to propagate uncertainties both in input parameters and in variables evaluated internally through its marine carbonate system calculations.

!!! question "Evaluating the derivatives"

    All derivatives needed for uncertainty propagation are calculated using *forward finite-differences*.  Explicity, the derivative of output variable $f$ with respect to input $x$ is estimated with:

    $f'(x) \approx \frac{f(x + \Delta x) - f(x)}{\Delta x}$

    As the input variables span many orders of magnitude, PyCO2SYS by default uses $\Delta x = 10^{-6} \cdot \mathrm{median}(x)$, which is different for each input variable.  However, this behaviour can be adjusted (see [Settings](#settings) below).

## Independent uncertainties

If the uncertainty in each [input parameter](../co2sys/#inputs) is independent – there is no covariance between uncertainties in different parameters – then you can use `PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.propagate` to propagate the parameter uncertainties through into any [output variable](../co2sys/#outputs).

### Syntax

You must run `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS` first (see [Calculate everything!](../co2sys) for details) to generate the `CO2dict` that is used as an input here.

    :::python
    import PyCO2SYS as pyco2

    # Get the CO2dict from CO2SYS
    CO2dict = pyco2.CO2SYS(PAR1, PAR2, PAR1TYPE, PAR2TYPE, SAL, TEMPIN, TEMPOUT,
        PRESIN, PRESOUT, SI, PO4, pHSCALEIN, K1K2CONSTANTS, KSO4CONSTANTS,
        NH3=0.0, H2S=0.0, KFCONSTANT=1, buffers_mode="auto",
        totals=None, equilibria_in=None, equilibria_out=None)
    
    # Propagate uncertainties
    uncertainties, components = pyco2.uncertainty.propagate(
        CO2dict, uncertainties_into, uncertainties_from,
        totals=None, equilibria_in=None, equilibria_out=None,
        dx=1e-6, dx_scaling="median", dx_func=None)

### Inputs

!!! info "`PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.propagate` inputs"

    #### `CO2dict`

    The first input, `CO2dict`, is generated by `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS`.  See [Calculate everything!](../co2sys) for more information.

    #### Uncertainties

      * `uncertainties_into`: a list of strings of the **output variable names** to propagate the uncertainties into.

    The `uncertainties_into` list can contain any of the [outputs of `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS`](../co2sys/#outputs) that can have an uncertainty (i.e. all aside from those relating to input settings).

    You can use `uncertainties_into="all"` to get propagate uncertainties through into every output variable at once, but this can be slow.

      * `uncertainties_from`: a dict of the **input parameter uncertainties** to propagate through `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS`.

    The keys of `uncertainties_from` may come from the [inputs of `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS`](../co2sys/#inputs) that can have an uncertainty.  Therefore any combination of `"PAR1"`, `"PAR2"`, `"SAL"`, `"TEMPIN"`, `"TEMPOUT"`, `"PRESIN"`, `"PRESOUT"`, `"SI"`, `"PO4"`, `"NH3"`, and `"H2S"` is valid.  Any parameters not included are assumed to have zero uncertainty.

    Additionally, the uncertainty in any parameter that can be provided as an [internal override](../co2sys/#internal-overrides) can be included within the `uncertainties_from` dict.  The keys for these parameters should be the same as the corresponding key in the main [`PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS` output dict](../co2sys/#outputs).
    
    The values of `uncertainties_from` are the uncertainties in each input parameter as a standard deviation.  You can provide a single value if all uncertainties are the same for a parameter, or an array the same size as the parameter if they are different.

    #### Internal overrides

    If you provided values for any of the optional [internal overrides](../co2sys/#internal-overrides) (`totals`, `equilibria_in` or `equilibria_out`) when running `PyCO2SYS.CO2SYS`, then you must provide exactly the same inputs again here.

    #### Settings

    These are all optional.

      * `dx`: controls the spacing multiplier for forward finite-difference derivatives (default = 10<sup>−6</sup>).  Can be either a single value or a one-dimensional array the same size as each entry of the `co2dict`.
      * `dx_scaling`: determines the method used to scale `dx`.  Options are, for each input variable `var`:
        - `"median"` (default): `dx[var] = dx * median(var)`.
        - `"none"`: `dx[var] = dx`.
        - `"custom"`: `dx[var] = dx_func(var)`, where:
      * `dx_func`: user-provided function to calculate `dx[var]` from `var` values; only used if `dx_scaling="custom"`.

### Outputs

!!! abstract "`PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.propagate` outputs"

    * `uncertainties`: the **total uncertainty** in each output variable in `uncertainties_into`.
    * `components`: the **separate contribution of each input parameter** in `uncertainties_from` to the total uncertainty for each output variable in `uncertainties_into`.

    Both outputs are dicts with keys the same as `uncertainties_into`.

    Each entry in `components` is itself a dict with keys the same as `uncertainties_from`, containing the uncertainty in the output variable from each input parameter separately.  For example, the uncertainty in total borate arising from the uncertainty in input salinity could be accesed with `components["TB"]["SAL"]`.

    Each entry in `uncertainties` is the Pythagorean sum of all the different uncertainty components for each variable.  This calculation assumes that all uncertainties are independent from each other.

## Uncertainties with covariances

PyCO2SYS does not currently have a generalised function for the complete process of propagating uncertainties that co-vary.  However, you can easily calculate the derivative of any output with respect to any input and use these to propagate uncertainties in any specific case:

    :::python
    co2derivs, dxs = pyco2.uncertainty.forward(co2dict, grads_of, grads_wrt,
        totals=None, equilibria_in=None, equilibria_out=None,
        dx=1e-6, dx_scaling="median", dx_func=None)

The inputs to `PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.forward` are the same as [described above](#inputs) for `PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.propagate` with the following notes:

  * `grads_of` can be the same as `uncertainties_from`, in which case the values are ignored, or more simply just `list(uncertainties_from.keys())`.
  * `grads_wrt` is the same as `uncertainties_into`.

The output `co2derivs` is a dict with the same structure as the [`components` output](#outputs) of `PyCO2SYS.uncertainty.propagate`, containing the derivatives of each output variable in `grads_of` with respect to each input parameter in `grads_wrt`.

The output `dxs` is a dict containing the actual `dx` values used for each variable after scaling.
